# Could have, would have, should have

## If correlation does not imply causality, what does?

### Introduction

There's a famous dictum among scientists that observing a correlation in your data does not mean that one caused the other. For instance, a famous study found that the best predictor of a student's success is having books in the home—not reading them—having them. Before we start stocking our childrens' shelves with books, however, we have to ask, "Is this because some other factor predicts both student success and home libraries?"

That's the conundrum in general: A and B appear in together in the data a lot, but does A cause B, does B cause A, or does some other C cause both A and B? The famous dictum tells us to be skeptical, but it doesn't tell us how to determine if two things _are_ causally related.

Worse still, I'm a physicist. Physicists work in the basement of reality, studying the processes that underlie all the other sciences. Before we can even talk about student success, we have to define what it means for a student to succeed, who's a student, what's a human, how life is composed of chemicals, the forces that give rise to chemical reactions, what forces are, and how we ever came up with these crazy notions of time and space in the first place. From a physicist's perspective, the other sciences take a lot for granted.

The thing that has troubled me throughout my career is that I don't see anything in nature (meaning "particles and thier fundamental interactions") that _looks_ like causality. If we say, "Books cause good grades," we want to mean, "If we give students more books, they will get better grades." We want knowledge we can act on. More fundamentally, a statement about a cause in physics might be, "If I collide these two particles, they will form a Higgs boson." But statements like that aren't true: the particle transformations that underlie the whole physical world are probabilistic.

They're not just probabilistic, but they can involve atemporal influences. In the midst of a network of interactions that we draw as a Feynman diagram, it often happens that a particle will trace a closed loop in time, become an anti-particle when traveling backward in time, and annihilate with itself at an earlier time. These interactions are common enough that we have a name for them: penguins. (Richard Feynman once complained that the name "penguin" was absurd: these diagrams don't look anything like penguins. The speaker responded that they didn't look anything like Richard Feynman, either.)

These atemporal shenanigans have led many to say that quantum mechanics breaks causality. The way 19th century physicists thought nature worked, particles could only travel forward in time and each event happened because of the previous. The discovery of quantum mechanics in the early 20th century revealed that those commonsense assumptions were too strong.

However, I think we're using the wrong word. Quantum mechanics broke determinism, not causality. Consider a statement of causality like, "If I push this glass, it will fall and smash on the floor." In a classical (19th century) view of physics, everything from the pushed glass to the toppling over and smashing on the floor is deterministic: particles in the glass are attracted to the center of the Earth, they accelerate according to prescribed laws of motion, and even the smashing is a complex but deterministic process. It would be possible to describe the trajectory of each shard of glass and how it spins as it moves as a mathematical function. In fact, modern video games demonstrate this well: computers evaluate the formulae discovered by classical physicists, producing scenes that look just like real glasses falling off real tables.

The part classical physics leaves out is the "If I push this glass" clause. Some classical physicists were philosophical determinists: humans are made of atoms, which follow prescribed laws, so humans and their behaviors are prescribed as well. The human in this example couldn't _not_ push the glass. Other classical physicists thought there was a division in nature: human decision making is a divine spark, an input to nature's processes as much as a video game player is an exception to the simulation that governs everything else.

So even without quantum mechanics, there didn't seem to be any room for causality in nature. If we take one point of view, everything that happens is mathematically determined by past events, all the way back to the beginning or in an infinite chain without beginning (both are logically possible). The universe is a single equation, and equations are not causal: saying, "2 + _x_ = 7" does not cause _x_ to be 5. It just is 5. It hardly matters whether we run the formulas forward or backward—the whole is a single, self-consistent tapestry.

If we take the other point of view, however, then we are gods. Human decisions are as important as universal gravitation in determining what happens to the glass. In a video game, this is explicit: there is a subroutine that listens for keyboard or touchscreen input and inserts motion or forces into the simulation ad hoc. In reality, it begs the question of why humans are so special and where is that dividing line between the divine spark that thinks on its own and the particles that follow mathematical laws.

### Science fiction

Time travel stories are laboratories for causality. We can only experiment on causality in fiction because time travel is impossible in real life, as far as we know. Particles form closed time loops in penguin diagrams, but only in the parts that are fundamentally unobservable—if you reflect photons off of these particles to try to shed some light on the situation, the diagram becomes a different diagram, in which acausal influences become negligible or vanish. Science fiction takes the same scenarios and puts a human in the loop.

There are basically two kinds of time travel stories: what I like to call "destructive paradoxes" and "constructive paradoxes." The destructive kind is more common. Marty McFly travels to the past and accidentally prevents his parents from getting together, which ultimately means that he won't be born and thus could not have traveled into the past to have prevented his parents from getting together. It establishes a real paradox—a thing could not have happened because it happened.

These kinds of stories are usually a mess of contradictions. In _Back to the Future_, Marty McFly's siblings fade out of a photograph one by one and the danger is that Marty with disappear, too. There is no explanation why he would disappear after the event, rather than before, or why his parents still didn't get together without him there to have caused it. "Or maybe the destruction would be localized, limited to merely our galaxy." These explanations don't make any sense, but I don't know how one would explain an event that prevents itself.

The other kind of story, a constructive paradox, is rigorous about causality. The events that happen are the events that happen, even if the characters who participate know about them in advance. These stories have a long tradition, including stories about prophesies like _Oedipus Rex_. Oedipus was told that he would marry his mother (as Marty McFly almost did) and it was precisely the actions he took to try to prevent it that caused it to happen. The atemporal influence—a prophet, in this case—fits like a jigsaw piece into the tapestry of events. This is not much different from closed time loops in penguin diagrams: the particle, now an anti-particle traveling backward to annihilate with itself, never misses.

This can be taken to a ridiculous extreme. Robert Heinlein's _All You Zombies_ is about a woman named Jane who is seduced by a man from the future, gets pregnant, and has medical complications while giving birth. In the confusion, the baby is stolen by another time-traveler and Jane is found to be a hermaphrodite. As a result of the damage, she is sexually reassigned as a man, joins a corps of time travelers, and eventually traveles back in time to seduce him/herself. The baby, likewise, is sent even further in the past because she (secretly he) is our main character. In fact, there is only one character in the whole story: the mother, father, and child are all the same person, as well as the supporting cast—the inventor of the time machine and the commander of the corps.

In perfectly consistent stories like this one, we have to wonder why they happen at all. Jane didn't share any genes with the human race; there is no physical reason why she would even look human. It is consistent that she invented time travel—she had to, after all—but it would have been just as consistent if she had never existed.

Likewise, the process described by a quantum mechanical penguin diagram could entirely exist or entirely not exist. How well the diagram fits together (the degree to which wavefunctions overlap, allowing energy to flow between them like vibrations from a cello string to the cello's body) determines how probable the process is. That's what physicists are doing when they compute these diagrams: they multiply coupling strengths at each junction where particles could decay or combine, regardless of whether the influence comes from the future or the past, and if the product is a big number, the process is highly probable. This is an extremely precise science.

Nevertheless, it seems like much more of a problem when there are humans in the loop, such as Jane. Jane, who also seduced her mother, could have refused. But if she had, she would never have been born. Her existence is exactly as mysterious as the existence of the entire universe: why does anything exist, rather than nothing?

Science fiction does attempt to solve the problem, however, especially for destructive paradoxes. Changing something in the past is said to create an alternate timeline, a branch in history. If a normal timeline is a linear chain of causes, an alternate timeline is a fork in the line of dominoes. The junction event causes both of the parallel lines that follow. Usually, these histories are imagined to diverge socially and technologically from the splitting event. The alternate one always has zeppelins.

This view is made to seem less problematic than it is because the science fiction story usually follows the time travelers who "cause" the timeline to split. Following their subjective time through the story, history was not split "before" they intervened and it was split "after." If the alternate timeline is "wrong" (e.g. fascist), we follow the time travelers again as they go back and "prevent" themselves from splitting history in the first place. In the end, time had never split. All is good.

The problem is that we're only considering the time traveler's subjective history as real. We have value judgements about timelines: one is natural, the other is alternate. Which timeline exists is something evaluated from the traveler's point of view: it wasn't split, then it was, then it wasn't again. This kind of lazy storytelling uses time as a setting, somehow distinct from the stream of events in which the story plays itself out.

If we take the time-split seriously, what happens when the time traveler accidentally creates a fascist dystopia? The traveler is just _visiting_ a fascist dystopia. When the traveler goes back to the turning point and follows it forward on the original timeline, we all return home to our preferred timeline, but the fascist dystopia still exists. If it could be said to exist while we were visiting it, it still exists now. How, then, is it a victory when the original timeline is restored?

At their laziest, science fiction authors invoke Hugh Everett's many worlds hypothesis to explain the split timelines. Hugh Everett intended to explain the multi-valued nature of quantum properties (more on that later) by suggesting that every point in time is a split timeline. A particle that a quantum mechanic would say is "50% here, 50% there" is, in Everett's view, here in one universe and there in another; it's a low-level communication between diverging timelines that lets a particle appear to be in both places.

Although that's a possible explanation of quantum entanglement, it should be considered a disaster for storytelling. Not only is our timeline as real as the fascist dystopia, but so is every tiny variation in between. There's a universe in which an electron in my shoulder jiggles left and a universe in which it jiggles right, and a whole history propagates from each one after the entanglement washes out and the timelines diverge. History is thick with forks. Not only can we choose our favorite timeline, but we have a continuum to choose from.

If our hero escapes against 100-to-1 odds in one timeline, he didn't escape in the other 99. He didn't beat the odds. Storytelling becomes an exercise in selective reporting.

### The problem quantum mechanics poses

Physicists tend to romanticize the pre-quantum era as a time of innocence. In the good old days, nature was deterministic. Knowing the past and the laws of motion, we can derive the future. It all made sense.

The first upset was relativity: intuitively, time is an offstage drumbeat that continues at a relentless pace, regardless of what happens in the play, but Albert Einstein presented a vision of time as a dimension like space that can mix just as length and width mix when a picture frame rotates. Space-time rotates differently from space-space: space-space can rotate 180° to completely reverse the direction of a length, but space-time maxes out at 45°, a speed at which a unit of distance is covered in an equal unit of time, since time and space can now be measured in the same units. This 45° line is called the speed of light because light is one of the things that travels at this speed.

That was an upset, at first, because it introduces a no-man's land between past and future. Since the fastest trajectory any moving particle or propagating wave can take is limited, there are events happening now that we can't be aware of. A nearby star could be exploding, but it will take years for the light, gravitational waves, neutrinos, or anything else to reach us. More disturbingly, "now" is ambiguous. A star exploding today that we won't see for 10 years has, in another frame of reference, already exploded 9 years ago. In yet another frame of reference, it won't actually explode for another 9 years. These reference frames are the time that would be experienced by astronauts in fast spaceships, and their time is slower or faster such that all physical events that involve contact are unchanged.

These reference frames are as valid as our reference frame, stationary on Earth, and surprisingly enough, no real paradoxes arise from this situation. Our intuitive notion that "now" is independent of speed is wrong, but if we scale back our claims to what we can physically measure, contact interactions of two particles at the same point in space and time, then everything is consistent.

So in physicists' romanticized history, relativity is a part of classical mechanics. But then came quantum.

At small scales, particles don't appear to have single-valued properties. Particle position can have multiple values—here _and_ there—speeds can have multiple values, as can rotation rates and a suite of new properties that describe nuclear and subnuclear interactions. The one I find most striking is rotation rate, called "spin," which is always quantized in exact units. Imagine a record player that can only play at 33, 45, and 78 RPM, never anything in between. A quantum record player could play at 45 _and_ 78 RPM, but it could never play at 60 RPM, not even as part of a transition from 45 to 78 RPM. That's just the way it works. It's not a dimmer switch that slides through a continuum of values, it's an on-off switch that can be 30% on, 70% off if it wants to.

These intermediate states can't be directly seen. If you ask a quantum record player in the half-45 RPM, half-78 RPM state how fast it's spinning, it will respond "45 RPM" or "78 RPM" with equal probability. Henceforth, it will be in an all-45 RPM or an all-78 RPM state, as though it had never been in a mixture. Moreover, anything else that depended on which state it was in would also act as though the record player had always been in the new state. Multi-valued states, by themselves, are not a problem—we could have expanded our mathematical model of nature to include functions of sets of numbers, rather than functions of numbers. It's the "pretending to have always been 78 RPM" that's a problem. The record player has retconned its own history.

Since these mixture states can never be observed, it's fair to ask why we should believe in them at all. For a while, physicists tried to find a way out. From 1928, when Niels Bohr identified Max Born's statistical interpretation as a quantum postulate, to 1964, when John Bell described a make-or-break measurement to decide the issue, or perhaps 1981, when Alain Aspect, Philippe Grangier, and Gérard Roger actually performed that measurement, it was possible that mixture states were a contrivance, hiding what was actually just noise in the system. For decades, physicists tried to prove that a record player that seems to be spinning at 78 RPM was actually spinning at 78 RPM before it was measured.

Bell's inequality, which Alain Aspect and many others have since measured, quantifies a distinction between correlations that quantum mechanics predicts and correlations that _any_ classical alternative could predict. There are many variations on the argument, but they all go like this: let's say that you have a quantum record player that is in a half-45 RPM, half-78 RPM state and a quantum tape recorder that records the music it plays. At 45 RPM, the music would sound normal; at 78 RPM, it would sound like squeaky chipmunks. The tape recorder records the record player and then the two are moved far apart. Alice observes the record player and Bob observes the tape recorder. With 50% probability, Alice finds that the player is at 45 RPM and Bob hears normal music, and with 50% probability, Alice finds that the player is at 78 RPM and Bob hears squeaky chipmunks. When Alice and Bob get together to compare results, they find that they are consistent.

If this experiment is performed many times, Alice and Bob accumulate a dataset that shows a strong correlation between the record player setting and the sound of the music on the tape recorder. If there were no mixed states—if the record player fluctuated between 45 and 78 RPM because of noise in the measurements—then the correlation wouldn't be as strong. Physicists tried to find sneakier and sneakier theories of non-mixed states, to try to claim that quantum processes do not rewrite their histories and yet can achieve these high correlations anyway.

That's what John Bell was doing: he was trying to formulate alternatives to the theory of mixed states. Thwarted at every turn, he weakened his assumptions to determine the maximum correlation that would be possible for any theory without mixed states. In certain circumstances, the maximum possible for a "realist" theory is less than what standard quantum mechanics predicts. Alain Aspect et al performed the measurement and standard quantum mechanics was vindicated.

The problem will not go away.

### Solutions to the problem quantum mechanics poses

One of the weak assumptions that John Bell made was that information does not propagate faster than the speed of light. Alice's record player and Bob's tape recorder were separated before they performed their measurements so that the record player, if it was measured first, would not send a secret message to the tape player to pretend it had always been squeaky chipmunks. Likewise, we wouldn't want a secret message to be sent from Bob's tape recorder to Alice's record player. By separating them to a large enough distance and measuring them within a short enough time interval, the two measurements are in the ambiguous zone where neither is before the other. The two parts of the entangled state are forced to speak for themselves, without help.

Thus, one easy way to solve the dilemma is to suppose that information can travel faster than light. This is an act of despiration—the "secret messages" were already act of desperation—we never said how or why the record player and tape recorder would want to help each other in their subterfuge. Also, relativity is one of the Good Theories: despite the fact that it defies intuition, it's fully consistent with a "realist" worldview. It's the apex of deterministic physics—time is reduced to geometry and motion is a shape. One could and some physicists do give up relativity to save determinism, but it's a hard argument to make, especially considering all the experimental evidence in favor of relativity.

Hugh Everett's many worlds interpretation is another solution. Instead of imagining one timeline that particles can rewrite or affect their former selves like Jane the time-traveler, we imagine an ever-splitting timeline with single-valued properties in each. When Alice observes the record player at 78 RPM and Bob hears squeaky chipmunks, there's another universe in which Alice observes 45 RPM and Bob hears normal music. They're correlated because they're in the same universe as each other. As they do the experiment over and over, doubling the number of universes with each experiment, they always happen to find themselves in the same universe as each other, and hence with consistent histories.

This works—it explains the paradox—but we lose our will to live. For every good deed I might do, there's a version of me that does the opposite. Every single thing that could happen is happening, all the time. Not only is there no reason to live, but I am in fact dying all the time, continuously. I mean we lose our will to live in the most literal sense: we lose our will. We can't make a thing happen because to say that it happens is just as correct as to say that it doesn't happen. Whether you feel motivated or dispirited by that is beside the point.

There's another, less-often discussed alternative. Unlike the many worlds interpretation, I think it's safe to say that this one has no adherents. One detail of Bell's inequality that I have left for now is that the problem isn't with 100% correlation: there are deterministic theories that can account for 100% correlations of simple mixed states. The issue is with more complex states, like the following.

An electron's spin, like the quantum record player, is quantized: it can either be spinning clockwise at a certain rate or counterclockwise at that rate. But "clockwise" and "counterclockwise" presupposes an axis. If an electron is spinning clockwise as seen from below, measurements of its spin relative to that vertical axis will always result in "spin up." Likewise, counterclockwise as seen from below is "spin down." But if you measure the same electron's spin along a horizontal axis it would be 50% "spin left" and 50% "spin right." If you measure along a diagonal, it's a different percentage, such that an axis that's very close to vertical would be 99% "spin uppish" and 1% "spin downish." A pure state when measured in one direction is a completely mixed state when measured perpendicular with all degrees in between.

Bell's inequality actually concerns these in-between correlations, in which Alice measures relative to a vertical axis and Bob measures along some diagonal. If Alice and Bob agree ahead of time what angles they will choose, the electrons might overhear them and pick spin values along these axes that correlate appropriately. Thus, Alice and Bob must choose their axes of measurement on the fly, after they're already separated by a great distance, and they must make their choices rapidly enough that secret messages can't be passed between the particles. The crux of the argument is that Alice and Bob are free to choose what experiments they perform.

Here's the alternative theory that exploits this loophole: superdeterminism. In a superdeterministic universe, everything is predetermined, including the choices that Alice and Bob make, and it forces their hand in such a way that they _happen to choose_ combinations that look like standard quantum mechanics.

This is not 19th century determinism, in which all motions follow from a simple mathematical law; it forces complex structures, such as human beings, to participate in a pageantry that would otherwise resemble a simple non-deterministic law. It's not the determinism of a clockwork or a wave, it's the determinism of a movie on a computer, in which the colors of each pixel in each frame are fixed from the beginning. It is a movie created by a trickster god to trick the entities on the frames who don't have any capacity for independent thought.

Both of these extremes, many worlds and superdeterminism, are attempts to save determinism from atemporal influences: Jane the time-traveling particle. I can't object to them on physical grounds because they are interpretations that explain the same phenomena as standard quantum mechanics, but philosophically, they are wrong. They're wrong because they are pointless: these theories describe a world of automatons who cannot appreciate these theories. At best, they are theories that a solipsist (someone who thinks he is the only consciousness in the universe) can think about everybody else.

The reason it's useful to consider the many worlds theory and superdeterminism is because they show exactly what is missing when you try to define causality in a deterministic worldview. Causality, the idea behind "if I push this glass, then it will fall and smash on the floor," needs two things: (1) a distinction between the real world and possible worlds, and (2) the idea that experimenters can make choices.

There is no causality in the many worlds theory because the glass falls and it also does not fall, each in different universes. There is a one-to-one relationship between the pushing and the smashing (mostly: there are small quantum probabilities for just about everything). But this is a correlation, not a cause. Causes are actionable: if putting books in a child's home really does increase their chances of success, then let's get some books! But if both branches of the if-then are _always_ taken, then that's not what we mean by causality.

Much more so for superdeterminism: this theory denies that any choices are possible to the extent that conclusions cannot be drawn from experimental measurements. In fact, it was invented to escape the interpretation of a particular experimental measurement. It's irrational to say, "I don't believe in free will because of science," because conclusions (such as this one) can only be drawn from measurements if the experimenters were free to choose which measurements to perform. If the experimenter's hand is forced to selectively take data only when a positive result would be obtained, that's the very definition of biased data.

Quantum mechanics didn't introduce these problems—they were present in 19th century determinism because they are problems with determinism. However, they are brought to the fore by attempts to save determinism from quantum mechanics.

Ironically, quantum mechanics doesn't break causality; it might have just saved it.

## Thoughts and Stuff

### Two different kinds of reality

Western philosophy is obsessed with the distinction between ideals—objects of thought—and empirical objects of the natural world. Statements about ideals can be proven without making any observations (_a priori_): a mind can discover them in isolation. Statements about the natural world require observations (_a postiori_). As a kind of shorthand, I think of them as "math" and "physics," though ideals are more general than math and the physical world is more general than physics. Instead, perhaps we could call them Thoughts and Stuff.

This distinction is an important one to make. In fact, it's important just to recognize these categories and that each one has a method. Before classical Greece, the Egyptians had geometry and fractions, Babylonians had a square root formula and the Pythagorean theorem, and many cultures had weights and measures, but the Greeks, particularly Aristotle and Euclid, developed mathematical thinking into a rigorous method called proof.

The important thing that they recognized was that logical statements are connectives from axioms or postulates, which are assumed, to theorems, which are derived. The truth of a logical statement has the form "if this, then that." Even a basic statement like 2 + 3 = 5 depends on definitions of 2, 3, 5, plus, and equality, and it remains true if the definitions of natural numbers are replaced by something equivalent, such as Peano arithmetic, in which numbers are replaced with sets of sets.

These statements and their proofs really are independent of empirical observation—experimental measurements are superfluous—and they're independent of culture as well. A statement like 2 + 3 = 5 might be motivated by seeing a group of 2 rocks and a group of 3 rocks, but the statement itself is a more basic fact than the rocks, as it applies to anything that can be counted. Although different cultures focus on different areas of math, they arrive at the same universal truths when they study the same problems. Separated by the continent of Asia, Archimedes and Liu Hui both calculated π and arrived at the same value within 0.1%. The idea of π is not a Greek idea or a Chinese idea.

Today, computers provide an even stronger illustration of the objectivity of logical thinking: it can be automated. Logical statements can be reduced to symbol-sentences in a specified grammar and deduction can be reduced to substitution rules on those symbol-sentences. Checking proofs is easy to automate; searching for proofs is harder because the set of possible substitutions is large if unguided, but it's possible. For instance, the Four Color Theorem, which had resisted proof for centuries, was finally solved by checking an exhaustive set of special cases by computer. Mathematicians sometimes deride such proofs as "symbol pushing" for reasons that I'll discuss below, but the fact that logical thinking can be mechanized demonstrates that we are _discovering_ something when we formulate a proof. We're not making something up and agreeing to uphold it as dogma.

Despite the power of proof for pure logic, it is insufficient for statements concerning the natural world. Aristotle's syllogisms were spot on but his physics was not. For instance, he argued that the Earth was motionless with the stars and planets rotating around it because (a) things fly off spinning objects, (b) if the Earth moved, it would leave flying birds behind, and (c) the relative angles between stars would change over the course of a year ("parallax"). All of these are common-sense postulates, but careful observation would show that they are all wrong: (a) the Earth doesn't spin _enough_ for objects to fly off of it, just some mild oblateness at the equator, (b) velocities of relative motions are additive, not absolute, and (c) the parallax effect is real but small because stars are very, very far away. The logic was perfectly sound; the facts were not.

Much like the development of logical proof in classical Greece, a scientific method developed in the Italian renaissance to put statements about the natural world on a firm footing. The central idea of this new scientific method was the use of experiments as interventions in nature. The classical and medieval method of discovering facts about the natural world was to passively observe it; scientists like Galileo actively modified an isolated environment to make general statements about the world.

For example, Galileo's claim that objects fall with identical acceleration, regardless of their weight, derived from experiments with polished balls sliding down planes. (Not a demonstration at the tower of Pisa; that was probably a thought experiment.) His opponents were understandably skeptical: Galileo described a complex procedure to polish the balls thoroughly, removing the effect of friction—how could such a specialized environment apply to the whole universe? And yet it's exactly what you need to do to isolate one effect from another in the complex natural world. Friction, in particular, confounded medieval physics: the many theories of motion (additive, multiplicative, and even logarithmic) grappled with the fact that moving objects slow down on their own. Removing friction made the basic laws of motion plain; friction could be reintroduced as a complication, rather than an essential feature.

The scientific method is still evolving, just as logical proof is evolving with the introduction of computers. Precise measurements were recognized as important early on: Aristotle was wrong about objects flying off the spinning Earth and the parallax effect only in a matter of degree. Statistical inference only became common in the 20th century. Sciences involving humans are aided by double-blind procedures, and blinding is becoming common in particle physics as well, to avoid the risk of _post hoc_ bias: rationalizing an observed result.

My main point, however, is that statements about logic are fundamentally different from statements about the natural world. The method for discovering logical truths doesn't work when applied to physical truths and vice-versa.

This has been called the two prongs of Hume's fork and has occupied a lot of Western philosophy. The point where I think the contrast breaks down is when a philosophical system claims that objects of pure thought are real and the physical world is but a shadow, or the reverse: that there is naught but atoms and the void. Team Thought has had its adherents, such as Plato and Bishop Berkeley, and Team Stuff has had its own, such as Democritus and Hobbes.

The problem, I think, is that it's hard to fit these wildly different things into the same word, "real." If you're in a mode where you're thinking of mathematical objects as real because they're untarnished by mismeasurement and inductive reasoning, then the physical world is not real in the same sense. But if you're thinking of physical objects as real because they are external to our minds, then the world of logic is not real in the same sense.

"Real" is just a word; we attach words to clusters of similar things, and it's a stretch to attach the same word to these two clusters, so how about two words? I like "valid" for logical truth and "factual" for physical truth. Saying that a logical statement is valid emphasizes that it's a connection from its premises to its conclusions, and saying that a physical statement is factual emphasizes that it's external to our minds.

So we've living in two realities. Taking this further, I would say that there's at least one more.

### A third reality: narrative

Pure logic and pure empiricism are not what mathematicians or scientists do. A paper listing billions of addition statements as theorems would be logically verifiable (by computer) and even novel, but not interesting. A table of measurements of thermal fluctuations in a rock would be factual, but not interesting. Both of these examples miss the point of why mathematicians and scientists do what they do.

The purpose of math and science is to explain things. An explanation is a story—a narrative—that steps from motivation to revelation in an emotionally satisfactory way. Just as a fictional story is not just "stuff that happens" (I'm deliberately excluding "slice of life" stories), a mathematical or scientific narrative has to come to a pleasing conclusion. Richard Feynman was fond of calling it the "pleasure of finding things out," because it is an emotional response. This is too often downplayed.

To illustrate the significance of narrative, consider Johannes Kepler's attempt to explain why the five planets have the exact orbital distances that they do. At the time (1597), only five planets were known to exist—Galileo's telescope hadn't yet revealed that there are smaller objects waiting to be discovered (1609). The number five suggests the five platonic solids (pyramid, cube, octahedron, dodecahedron, and icosahedron), so he tried to fit the orbits together by inscribing each of these solids inside the others. It didn't quite work: he was thwarted by good enough empirical measurements and his own honesty to see that the orbits don't exactly fit together this way, but it would have been a very pleasing conclusion if they had. By logical arguments, the five platonic solids are known to be the only ones that can exist, which would make a good punchline for the story of the five planets.

Today, however, we know about Uranus and Neptune, as well as countless objects from the size of Pluto and Ceres down to grains of dust. There's no fact of "five planets" to explain. As for their orbits, we know that they changed in the early solar system (Jupiter was moving inward before Saturn pulled it back) and that the whole thing formed from a chaotic swirl of dust. The distributions of orbits are interesting, not just in our solar system, but solar systems in general, as well as statistical features of the dynamics, but an exact play-by-play of which rock hit which other rock to give us the current solar system that we have. If somebody managed to work it out, the paper would be called a "tour de force," but would not be read.

A similar shift in narrative may be happening right now in particle physics. String theory has not produced a satisfying theory of everything, in that it has not explained why the known particles exist with their masses and interaction strengths from a unified principle of vibrating strings (or more generally, branes). The problem is actually an embarrassment of riches: the fundamental theory predicts an enormous set of energy wells that the universe could have settled into, each one with a different set of particles, masses, and interaction strengths. The real universe—at least the part of it that we can see—would have settled into one of them through a random fluctuation in the Big Bang. Since that fluctuation was random, string theory has nothing to say about why this set of particles and not another (and this one is statistically unusual).

It seems like string theory is out of the game of predicting why we have the particles that we do, in much the same way that it isn't sensible to ask why our solar system has the exact number of planets and orbital distances that it does. For some physicists, this means that string theory fails as an explanation and should be discarded; others have changed the narrative. They say, perhaps the universe does randomly choose an energy well—different parts of the infinite universe choosing different wells—and we find ourselves in the one we're in because it has the right particle content to support life. Most energy wells wouldn't allow molecules or solid matter to form. The answer to why we're in this highly unusual pocket of the universe is that we're here to ask the question.

This new narrative is highly controversial. It's called the "anthropic principle" and many physicists haven't signed onto it. To accept it would be to give up hope of a complete explanation, some fundamental principle that explains why we have the particles we see—and only those—as a necessary derivation. But like Kepler's five planets, maybe there isn't something to explain.

